[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello.
My name is Gregg Braden.
And I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links,
Simulation by Design,
Are We Living in a
Virtual Reality?"
Well, in the last episode,
we identified the laws
that govern our virtual world,
the basic laws of physics
and what it takes to master
those laws in our lives.
When we consider
these understandings
and we merge them
with everything else
that we've learned throughout
this entire series,
well that's enough to make our
head spin with possibilities.
And suddenly we have
a new way of thinking
and a new vocabulary to describe
our relationship to the world
and the life itself.
The implications are staggering.
And the questions are endless.
So in this final episode
of "Simulation by Design,"
we'll answer many
of those questions.
And by doing so, we
will come full circle
to where we began this series.
Only now we have the
vocabulary to make
sense of our virtual reality.
In this program, you've
seen the evidence
that tells us it is more
likely than not that we
are living in a simulated
world, in a virtual universe.
And you've seen the
evidence that is telling you
that you have the potential to
interact with this universe,
to interact with this reality in
ways that have seemed mystical
in the past, and reserved
for the monks, and nuns,
and the abbots, and the shamans
living mystical lifestyles.
Now we know we don't need to
live on a monastery halfway
around the world and leave
everything familiar to us--
our loved ones, our jobs,
our families; to embrace
these seemingly mystical powers.
Because when we understand
the relationships,
we demystify the experience.
In the contemporary
language of science
we are now talking about
mystical connections
and we are marrying
those connections
with the best science
of the modern world
to give us a new view,
an evolutionary edge,
to understand what's
happening in our world
and beyond that how we may
direct the events of our lives
and the events of the world
in a positive, powerful way.
So, as you've
seen, the parallels
between the laws of physics
as we know them today
and the rules of the simulation,
are absolutely clear.
They're unmistakable.
And the evidence is showing
us more likely than not,
we are, in fact
in the simulation.
So what I'd like to do
in this last segment now,
is pull all of this together.
Let's get down to
the nuts and bolts
of what this experience means.
Let's jump right into what it
means to be in a simulation--
the implications and
the questions that
invariably come up.
Questions like, where is
heaven; where is heaven?
When we think about
our simulation
and we think of the
descriptions of heaven, the word
itself was left to us
about 2,500 years ago.
What does that mean to us
in terms of the simulation?
Well, the simulation is
a localized experience.
But it tells us,
we're not really here.
You're not really here.
We exist somewhere outside
of the simulation and we are
projecting our energetic
body, what we call our spirit
or our soul or our avatar, into
this experience so that we can
learn something here that
apparently we cannot learn
where we've come from and that
apparently we're going to need
wherever we are going.
Now this is a really,
really powerful concept.
The idea that we are not
here-- and the biology
actually supports it.
What the biology
is showing us is
that our cells
receive information
that defines who we are.
The surface of the
cells, the receptors,
receive this information.
And that's why when
we take our cells
and we put them into the
body of another person
through an organ
transplant, for example,
that person rejects the cells.
Because it's not them.
We have an identity and that
identity begins somewhere
beyond our simulation.
And in terms of the ancient text
that is what was called heaven.
When we leave our simulation,
we shift our consciousness.
We go back to where it
is that we came from.
And for me, I believe that.
And I think it's
really good news.
It means that we will see our
friends and our loved ones
again on the other side,
what is called the veil,
on the other side of that veil.
And I hope that there's
a time on that other side
that we can look back
and review everything
we've done in this world and
hopefully laugh about some
of the mistakes that
we've made, that we've
made while we were trying
to learn about ourselves
in this simulation.
So heaven, heaven I believe is
the ancient word for the world
that we live in that
exists on the other side,
outside of the simulation that
we find ourselves in right now.
So the next question, what
does that mean for death?
Where do we go when we die?
If this simulation
theory works the way
that the science suggests
and the way that I
believe that the
evidence is directing us,
it's really good news.
Because it means
when we die, what
we call death is the end of
this representation of us
in this limited simulation,
what we would call our avatar,
just as we're seeing portrayed
in the films, in the media.
Again consciousness
reminding us of ourselves,
communicating with us, informing
us of the reality of our world,
consciously and subconsciously.
So when we die this
avatar no longer
exists in the physical realm.
But our essence
that we've projected
continues in the
realm outside, perhaps
in another physical body.
So once again, we think back.
What is the purpose
of the simulation?
Simulation is to learn a new
way of being in a realm that
is relatively safe, because
we need that way of being
when we go to another place.
So if we are individually,
collectively,
outside of our simulation, we're
in a control room somewhere,
we're in some kind of a
technological environment.
And we'll talk about this
in just a few minutes, where
whatever has happened in
our world is telling us
that we need to learn
a new way of being.
Here we are in this
situation and we are
learning what we're learning.
One of the things that I
find really interesting
is the concept of time.
You know, I think you
know that astronauts,
for example, when they
travel they age differently.
Their bodies age differently
than we do here on Earth.
This is about Einstein's
theory of relativity.
So, the thinking is that in the
future when we have astronauts
that leave the
earth, leave the moon
and go deep into the solar
system and maybe even
beyond, that they will age
slower than their husbands,
wives, families, their
children here on Earth.
And if they should ever return,
they would actually be younger,
and those that they'd left
behind would be older.
That tells us that our
simulation, the relationship
with time in our
simulation, what
seems like a lifetime to us,
what seems like a hundred
years, may only be a few moments
of time in the control room
outside of our simulation.
That it's all relative in terms
of the way we think about this.
The idea of God comes up a lot
when we talk about simulation.
And once again, I just invite
you to think about this.
We are now talking about
this very, very deep concept
in this contemporary language.
But those who understood
this simulation, those
who understood that we're
temporarily learning something
and that we're going to go to
another world; how in the world
would they have shared this
with the people of their time
2,000, 2,500, 3,000,
5,000 years ago?
When we look into
the ancient texts,
and I've spent much
of my adult life
searching not only the
contemporary texts, but also
the mystical texts and the
texts that have been relegated
to mystical texts,
because they were
deleted from the contemporary
canon of the Bible,
for example.
And not only the Christian,
Bible but the Hebrew Bible,
beyond the Torah, beyond
the first five books--
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers and Deuteronomy;
there are other
Hebrew texts that
were also edited and
relegated to mystical texts.
They're not part of
the contemporary canon.
So, when we go back and we
look at those deleted texts
and the way that they were
condensed, we see a story.
And the story tells us
that in the beginning,
so whether you think the natural
beginning of the Big Bang
or you think the beginning
of our simulation.
In the beginning, there
was a prime creator
and that is the idea of God.
But the texts also tell us
that God did not create us.
God created the environment.
God created the universe.
But when you go into
those mystical texts.
It says that humans were
created by groups, they.
It says when they
created the first humans.
And it goes on to describe
in the book of the Haggadah,
for example, one of the
gnostic texts of the Mandaeans,
they created.
And when you go into the deleted
texts in the Christian Bible,
they created the first humans.
And what I find even
more interesting
is that when those texts talk
about the creation of humans
they say that a very
specific formula of human
had to be created to hold
the energy of the soul
or the spirit in this realm.
Now what does that mean?
When we think now
about a simulation,
we know that it takes a
certain genetic makeup
to hold the energy of the spirit
or the soul, the consciousness
that we bring into this world.
And apparently not
any old formula of DNA
was up to the task.
So, when we look into our past
and we find forms of life that
were perhaps not as conscious,
not as evolved as us;
in the simulation idea,
these are the forms
of life, the first forms.
They were the early attempts
to create the avatars
in this simulated world.
But their genetic makeup
was not strong enough
to hold the energy of the soul.
You and I are the product
of a genetic formula,
a very specific form of DNA.
And apparently it
is this form that's
required to hold the energy
of the soul in this simulation
experience so that we
could have the experiences,
learn what we're
learning, and maintain
the consciousness
that we have as we
go through our experience.
So, once again,
what we're doing is
we're taking these
very ancient ideas
and we're rethinking them
with a contemporary language,
based on what the best
science of the modern world
is now suggesting
is the realities
that we're experiencing.
So, heaven, where do we go
when when we die, what is God;
all of these now take
on a new meaning.
God, whoever god
is apparently is
the architect that was a primary
designer of this simulation.
And I'm looking forward to
getting to the other side
in meeting that architect
at some point in our future.
Perhaps the biggest
question that
comes up when I
have conversations
with other scientists and people
about what you and I are doing
right now, considering the
possibility of this simulation,
this virtual environment;
the big question
is how long could this
simulation possibly last.
How does it end?
What could cause it to end?
And to answer this
question, this
is precisely why I took
a little bit of time
in the previous episodes to
talk about the fractal patterns,
for example, and the fractal
codes, the Koch snowflake,
showing us about the
complexity of the parameter
and how it can change
while the space
that the snowflake
actually occupies
remains relatively constant.
All of those ideas now I'm
going to bring them together
to answer the question, how
long can our simulation last.
What would cause it to end?
In a simulation
environment, when
we ask ourselves
what could possibly
end this virtual reality,
this world that we know,
the end would be the same as
it is for any computer program.
When one of two possible
conditions exists,
the end of the program occurs.
Number one is when
the system runs out
of space to store the
information that is generated.
Number two is when
something unexpected
happens that corrupts
the entire system.
So let's take a
look at these two
very well-known possibilities
for conventional computer
programs.
And let's see how
they might apply
and what they may mean for
our simulated environment.
Before his death in 2008,
Princeton University Professor,
John Wheeler, a physicist, he
was a contemporary of Albert
Einstein's.
But he and Albert Einstein
had very, very different ideas
of our relationship to
our physical reality.
Nothing could have been
more diverse than the way
that these two men, looking
at the same information,
the same data,
the same formulas;
fought about our
relationship to the world.
And they came up with very,
very different perspectives.
Albert Einstein,
brilliant man that
was, he did not like the idea
that we could be so deeply
connected with our environment
that we could actually
influence our environment
and especially at a distance.
Albert Einstein did not like
the idea of entanglement.
These theories were just being
developed during his lifetime.
And when he heard that
it may be possible
for us to influence
from where we
are one part of the
world to what's happening
in another part of
the world, he actually
have a term for that
kind of influence.
He called it spooky
action at a distance.
Einstein didn't like that.
And he went to his
grave with a frustration
of never being able to
unify the laws of physics,
because he did not allow
for this relationship,
this entanglement that
we see in our world.
This is on the one hand.
On the other hand,
John Wheeler came up
with a completely different
view of the universe.
Wheeler said the universe
could not exist without us.
He said that we are part
of an ongoing process.
He said the universe
isn't finished yet.
He said it is
continually being built.
We are continually
adding to the universe
and we're doing it
through consciousness.
He said, we live
in what he called--
and I'm going to quote-- "a
participatory universe that
continues to build itself."
Well, the implications
of what John Wheeler said
have a direct
impact on the answer
to the question, how long
can our simulation last.
And here's the reason why.
What John Wheeler said
to us about living
in a participatory universe
suggests the following.
It suggests that we
will probably never find
the smallest particle of
matter, because every time we
peer deeper and deeper
into the fundamental nature
of our reality--
and this is what's
important here--
the act of us looking is an act
of creation in our simulation.
And it puts something
there for us to see.
So, the deeper we look,
every time scientists
think they've got the
smallest particle,
then they build new
equipment and they
find that they can
break that particle
and there's something
underlying that particle.
And then they do it again, and
they do it again, and again.
Now think about what this means
in terms of our simulation.
Every time we look and
consciousness puts something
there for us to see that
something is energy.
It is information.
And we are constantly adding
information to the system
through the act of
looking, searching,
to find the limits
of our experience.
So, the deeper we look into
the atom, the more information
we're putting out there.
The further we look
into the cosmos,
scientists are looking for
the edge of the universe.
And they thought
they found it twice.
They thought they
found the boundary that
marks the edge of our
physical universe.
Here's what happened.
They built new equipment.
And the new equipment
looked differently
at that boundary
and lo and behold,
they found that there
was something else
beyond the boundary.
I can't emphasize this enough.
Our act, the act of us
looking with the expectation
that we will see something,
is an act of creation
within our simulated universe.
And the more we create, the more
information we are generating.
And that information
has to go somewhere.
We are living in a finite
environment of our simulation.
And this is what the Koch
snowflake was telling us.
So the question is, how
much can we explore?
How much information
can we create?
How much energy can we
generate until our environment
is full and can hold no more?
And when we reach
that point, and I
don't know if it's
in the near future
or in the distant future.
But what the fractal code tells
us is that at some point--
remember the Koch snowflake.
It said we can
generate complexity.
But when it comes
to the actual space
that the snowflake
takes, it levels out.
It doesn't go on forever.
When we reach that level that
suggests that our simulation
would come to an end.
And this is really
interesting, because scientists
are telling us now
that we are doubling--
doubling the amount of
information that comes to us.
And at least every year we are
doubling what we have known.
It took 5,000 years
for the first doubling.
And now the second
and third and fourth
we're doubling every year.
So it means that we are
generating more information,
more energy than we
ever have in the past.
How long can we do that
before our simulation is full?
Before the storage device--
I don't think it's a hard drive.
I think we will have transcended
the hard drives by the time
the simulation is understood.
But whatever it is that's
generating this information,
how much energy can it hold?
So, for the first
time in human history,
we have a reason to question
how much information can we
generate and store in the
field that connects all things
before that field
actually reaches capacity.
I don't know the answer now.
But I think we're going to
find out within our lifetimes.
The very fact that we
are in a simulation
tells us something
very, very powerful.
It tells us because we are
here that we are either near
or that we've already
reached a place
in our evolutionary process
where we need a simulation.
We were already at
a place where we
need to find a new way of
being, a new way of living,
a new way of thinking.
Now it may be because
of a climate change.
Maybe we are an
advanced civilization.
We are an advanced
society living right here
on planet Earth or
maybe some other world.
And we've experienced
climate change.
And we did not know
how to address it.
And the planet is no longer
hospitable for that reason.
Or maybe we've had a
pandemic disease or maybe
we've had an atomic war.
Maybe we're close to one of
these and we are searching.
We are simulating environments,
searching for ways
so that we can avoid these
great crises in our lives.
And when I've said this
to people in the past--
I've had this conversation--
I've said it to a large
audience, I've said one on one.
And when I suggest these
possibilities of actually
seeing scientists look
at me, and they tear up
and they cry when they
hear this possibly.
Because it touches something
very deep and very real
within each of us.
I think we all know that
we're here for a reason.
We all know that there's
something much, much bigger
happening then what
we've come to understand
and what we've been
led to believe.
So I'm sharing the possibilities
that the evidence suggests.
The possibility of
running out of space
in our simulation that was
only one possibility of what
could end this experience.
The second is an unexpected
event, a tremendous release
of energy of some kind.
And that thinking
coincides with the theme
of what our simulation is
all about to begin with.
The theme of life on Earth
for the last 5,000 years
has been primarily a
theme of war and conflict.
For over 5,000 years, humans
have almost continuously been
in conflict to one degree or
another in one form or another.
And the consistency
of that experience
suggests that it must play a
powerful role in our simulation
and why we're here
to begin with.
Now the archaeological record
preserves that history.
And it tells us of different
kinds of global conflict.
And for me, this is the
value of looking at the past.
Yeah, sure it's interesting.
You know, it's interesting to
look at ancient civilizations.
It's interesting to see what
people have done in the past.
For me as a scientist, the
value of looking into the past
is to recognize the patterns,
the trends, and the cycles
of those who have
come before us;
and to compare those to where
we are today and ask ourselves,
are we repeating those trends?
Are we repeating the patterns?
Are we repeating the cycles?
And it would make sense
if the answer is yes.
Now that we understand
the fractal code
and Newton's laws of energy.
Because the fractal
code says that we
will continue those patterns
until something-- something
in the variable changes.
And Newton's law
tells us that once
the energy is set into
motion that same energy is
going to continue until
something changes the energy.
So if there is a
thinking of conflict,
if there is a fear that there's
not enough, of scarcity,
if there is a fear of
the unknown, a fear
of other people, a fear of
what those people's lives mean
to us; and if that fear is
so ancient and so primal
that it is played out in every
civilization for the last 5,000
years and beyond,
then it makes sense
that this idea of
conflict and war
would be a primary reason for
us to be in this simulation.
And the archeology
supports this.
If Bostrom's mathematic
arguments are correct,
the fact that we're here today
asking these questions that's
good news.
Because it implies that we
have the wisdom to recognize
we're at a point where we
need to ask these questions.
It tells us there is a
need for this simulation.
So these are big ideas.
And I know they are.
And I'm bringing
them together now
at the close of this series,
because we have the vocabulary.
And we have a new context within
which to share these ideas.
So, what I'd like to do now
is give you a specific example
of what I'm talking about, this
pattern of conflict and whether
or not repeating the cycle.
So I'm going to use archeology,
contemporary archeology to do
this.
There was an
archaeological discovery
that was made mid-20th century,
a very mysterious, very
powerful discovery.
It's very controversial today.
And it is in the region
that is now called Pakistan.
It used to be India before
that the division happened,
and in the disputed areas
between India and Pakistan
in the Kashmir area.
There is evidence of an
advanced technological society
and advanced technological
civilization.
They had hot and
cold running water.
They had flush toilets.
They had stained glass windows.
They had advanced mathematics.
They had beautiful,
beautiful art.
And this advanced civilization
came to an abrupt end.
And we know that because
of what was left behind.
Now, when the
scientists began finding
this evidence of
this civilization,
one of the first
things that they found
were walls and floors that were
made of natural stone, granite,
for example.
But the term that was used
that the stones were vitrified.
Now, what this means--
I'm going to use granite
as an example-- granite
is made of three
minerals-- quartz, feldspar
which is a clay, and mica.
So, the quartz, the feldspar,
in the mica were in place.
However, the quartz in place
was melted within the stone.
Now, to melt the courts
in place requires
number one, a high amount
of heat to do the melting;
but number two, it
has to be very fast.
Because it didn't destroy
the floors and the walls.
So, it suggest a
rapid very high heat,
some point in our ancient
past that melted the quartz,
left everything in place.
They also found
mysterious little spheres,
little balls of clay.
They didn't know
what these were.
And when they
began to understand
that the walls and the
floors were vitrified
from a rapid intense heat, they
found that these little spheres
were clay vases that had
also been exposed to the heat
and were simply melted in place.
So, the scientists
are asking, what
is it that could
have possibly caused
this kind of intense
heat, intense enough
to melt the quartz, but so
fast that the walls were still
in place?
Well, some of the
human skeletons
that were discovered-- and
this is very controversial.
Some of the human skeletons
may give us a clue.
The skeletons were found
primarily in this location.
They were all at one end of
this ancient city in what
are called postures of flight.
And these are Russian
scientists in the mid-1960s
that were the first to find
this, postures of flight.
What does that mean?
It means they were running
away from something.
They were all at one end of
the city and they were running.
And the giveaway is that
some of the skeletons
were actually radioactive.
They were more
radioactive than you
would expect from the
normal background radiation
that we have from the
earth and from cosmic rays.
We're all absorbing radiation.
But the level in these
skeletons was higher
than it should have been.
So, the scientists
are looking at this.
They're putting
this all together
and they're saying, what
in the world could happen.
And this is one of
those places where
if you look at the
evidence itself,
you're never going
to solve the mystery.
We don't live in a vacuum.
History does not
occur in a vacuum.
And this is where
context is so important.
So, the evidence is
showing us a mystery.
However in that
part of the world,
the sacred text of
Mahabharata tells
a story that is believed
to have been a fairytale.
It is believed to have been
a fairytale because what
it describes is something
that is unfathomable up
until the 20th century.
What this text
describes makes no sense
until the technology of
the mid-20th century.
So, what I'd like
to do, I'd like
to read a portion of
an English translation
to you from this text.
And then let's take
this translation,
apply it to what has been
found archaeologically,
and see where that
leaves us in terms
of the cycles in our simulation.
So here are passages
from the text.
There were two armies
that were in a great war
at the end of a cycle.
All right.
The two armies were fighting.
And one of the
armies began to lose
and they resorted
to a weapon that
had never been used before.
And this is the way the
text describes the weapon.
It says "a single
projectile charged
with all the power
of the universe,
an incandescent column of
smoke and flame, as bright
as a thousand suns rose
in all of its splendor.
A perpendicular explosion with
the billowing smoke clouds.
The cloud of smoke rising
after the first explosion,
formed into expanding
circles like the opening
of a giant parasol."
"It was an unknown weapon,
an iron thunderbolt,
a gigantic messenger
of death which
reduced to ashes the entire race
of Vrishnis and the Andhakas.
The corpses were so burned
as to be unrecognizable.
The hair and the nails fell out.
Pottery broke without
apparent cause,
and the birds turned white.
After a few hours all
food stuffs were infected,
and to escape from
this fire, the soldiers
threw themselves
into the streams
to wash themselves
and their equipment."
So, the description
that you've just heard
is from an ancient text.
However what it
describes sounds very
much like a contemporary
description of the unthinkable,
of a nuclear explosion happening
some time in our ancient past.
Is it possible?
Is it possible that these
advanced civilizations
that we now know are cyclic
that have risen and fallen
in the past, that
had electricity, that
had hot and cold running
water, and flush toilets,
and stained glass
windows, and advanced
mathematics of the cosmos and
of nature itself; is it possible
that they began a path
that we are following now?
Are we the first atomic
civilization or has there
been one before us?
Well, the father of the
modern nuclear program,
Robert Oppenheimer, was
asked this very question.
In an interview that he was
doing at Rochester University
there was a student
that asked it,
and he said, Dr.
Oppenheimer, how
do you feel after
having exploded
the first atomic bomb on Earth?
And Oppenheimer replied.
And his reply
shocked the audience.
It shocked the person who
was asking a question.
Because Oppenheimer
said, well, he
said not the first atomic bomb,
but the first in modern times.
Robert Oppenheimer was a
student of the Mahabharata.
He was a student of the
Bhagavad Gita, the related text.
And he firmly believed
that we are, in fact,
a cyclic civilization
and that we are repeating
a pattern from the past.
And if we are within the
context of our simulation,
we have to ask, what are the
consequences of our simulation
if we were to engage in a
large-scale nuclear war?
Now, think about this in terms
of this entire conversation.
The release of energy
from a nuclear weapon
is information, tremendous
amounts of information.
How much information would
be released into the system
if we had multiple nuclear
explosions in a conflict,
like we've had perhaps in
the past on a limited scale?
How long could we
continue to produce
that kind of
information before we
reach that capacity, that limit
that we talked about earlier?
So, this whole idea
of the simulation
is giving us new ways to think
about us, about what we're
living, about what's
happening in our world
and what's happening
in our lives.
If the unthinkable has
happened in the past,
are we repeating that
cycle again in our lives?
And if we are, can
we recognize it?
Do we have the wisdom
to recognize it
and as Newton's law
says, shift the energy.
Move to a new course.
Plug in a new variable
into that fractal code,
so that we can
avoid the suffering
that obviously would
come from such a path.
The common thread that
runs through every one
of the possibilities
that I've described,
whether we're talking
about climate change,
or we're talking about
disease pandemics or war;
is that every one of
these possibilities
is related to human choice.
It's the choices that we
are making within our lives,
now within our simulation,
that are resulting
in the very conditions that
could end this experience based
upon the way we think.
Now, my sense,
personally; my sense
is because conflict has
played such a dominant role
throughout history and that
that theme is playing out today
and it appears to be coming to a
head, again and again this idea
keeps coming up.
My sense is that we are
learning to create a world where
war doesn't exist or
it's become obsolete.
And we're doing so by
developing the potential that
lives within each of
us as individuals.
And remember, the better we know
ourselves, the less we fear--
the less we fear one another and
the less we fear the unknown.
If we're honest
with ourselves, we
know that the world is changing.
And we also know that
the old ways of thinking
are failing when it comes
to solving the big problems
like climate change and war.
We need a new way to think about
our world and a new language
to solve our problems.
Simulation by design
is an invitation.
It invites us to think
differently about ourselves,
about yourself, and what you've
been taught when it comes
to our world and our past.
The science gives us rock solid
reasons to think differently.
But the events of
today's world tell us
that now is the time to do so.
So, as we begin to embrace the
possibility that we are living
in a simulated world, we also
unlock the deepest mysteries
of our existence.
At the same time
we're discovering
what it takes for us to become
the best people we can be
and to create the
best possible world.
I want to thank you for
joining me throughout this very
special presentation
of "Missing Links,"
and I hope you've
enjoyed watching it as
much as I enjoyed creating it.
And while we have reached
the end of this program,
I want you to know that there's
more, much, much more to come.
So, be sure to tune in
to the all-new "Missing
Links" for the discoveries
that reveal the deepest
truths of our origin, history,
our destiny, and our fate.
Until then, thank
you for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]